Cooper Union will admit students using The Common Application beginning with the Class of 2019. While the current freshmen class will no doubt remember the CommonApp for the infamous technical issues that plagued its systems last year, most other students may recall that the CommonApp, as its name suggests, is a unified application to colleges across the nation, involving basic applicant data and a selection of common essays.  With the rumors that Cooper Union is joining the ranks of CommonApp schools, The Pioneer sat down with Mitchell Lipton, Vice President of Enrollment, and John Falls, Associate Dean of Admissions.
Cooper’s previous application process involved a jumble of pieces, some which were mailed by post and others that were sent by email. In many cases, the various application forms needed to be made available in more than one format, creating redundancies and confusion. Worse yet, this required a tremendously inefficient process John Falls aptly refers to as “turning piles into files”; consolidating dozens of documents for thousands of applicants.
	Instead, offering the CommonApp means a single, unified system that applicants are already familiar with. Furthermore, applicant data is already in one place by default, making the process easier for both applicants and admissions staff alike. Dean Lipton sums it up very simply as “one app: The CommonApp”.
	Many are now wondering if this changeover will result in an application process that is radically different to what they remember. The admissions office, however, emphasizes the contrary: the essence of the application will remain virtually unchanged. The home- and studio-tests will continue to be at the core of the application. 
Students from all three schools would agree that Cooper’s admission process is one of a kind. Many artists still recall the minutiae of their home-test and the architecture studio-test is unmatched by any other institution. Moreover, Part II of the application, the free-form essay portion, is common to all three disciplines, but still distinctive of Cooper Union’s core ethos and attitudes toward learning. We have a proud culture and a long history of refraining to be limited, and this is fittingly reflected in the unconstrained second part of the application. 
With regards to the shift to the CommonApp, this second ‘meaty’ part of the application will continue to be completed in the exact same manner: it will be sent separately; written by applicants under the same guidelines; and entirely devoid of word limits. In fact, Dean Lipton confirmed that the content of part II will take precedence over the CommonApp’s own essay requirements in the eyes of the admissions office. 
Still, members of the Cooper community are also skeptical about the timing of this transition. According to Dean Lipton, the CommonApp has been on the table for 5 years. The CommonApp organization requires that colleges have their affairs in order at least 8 months prior to the application cycle. While attempts were made to join the CommonApp last year, the tense and tumultuous environment surrounding the charging of tuition precluded these efforts. So, the transition was postponed for one more year. Presently, the admissions office was able to meet the deadline for this year, confirming the shift in January 2014. 
With 2,756 current high school seniors who have expressed strong interest in the Cooper Union and over 200 prospective students in attendance at the Engineering Preview, the school is poised for a fruitful application cycle this year with the CommonApp.
